Good afternoon, everybody.
I am James Dempsey.
Some of you may recall that
I've been doing technical
training for the past four years.
In the about February timeframe,
I moved over to software engineering
and since have written and
deployed WebObjects application.
So I'm loving the technology.
I wanted to ask a few questions
before we got started.
The first thing I wanted to ask is how
many folks here are absolutely brand
new to the Enterprise Objects Framework?
So a good chunk of people.
How many of you have done a
little bit but that's about it?
Not too many.
And how many of you have our old
hands at the EOF framework but you
just come to every EOF session?
Okay, and how many of you worked
on the WebObjects team?
Okay, there we go.
The rest of the crowd.
All right,
so we got some brand new folks.
We got some folks who may
know this stuff fairly well.
The second thing I wanted to ask folks
is how many folks are looking at or
interested in the Enterprise Objects
Framework because they're planning
on doing some sort of HTML or
XML based WebObjects applications?
So a good chunk of folks.
And how many folks might be interested
in EOF because they heard about the
redistribution license of EOF that allows
you to do desktop applications with EOF?
So another smattering of hands.
Good.
We got you all covered for today.
And how many of you saw the
episode of Friends where Joey goes
for this acting job and then
he's in Charlton Heston's shop?
I know.
I'm serious.
I want to know.
In Charlton Heston's shower.
Did anybody see that one?
What was the... Well,
we'll get into it later.
That was just a very funny episode.
Anyway, what are we going to talk
about EOF related today?
When I first started learning
EOF about four years ago now,
what I found was that
I came and saw a number of
demonstrations and I saw a lot of
data flying out of databases and
onto screens and what have you.
But I was never really sure
how that magic was happening.
And that always bugged me.
So I've spent the past four
years figuring that out.
And I think I have it just
about worked out almost.
What I want to go through
today is first let's talk a
little bit about what EOF is.
Like why might we use it?
And then let's do a little bit of
practical here are the lines of code
to do some basic database operations.
Then let's look at how it
works in a desktop environment.
And then finally let's just get a big
picture of what all the pieces are,
why they exist,
so that we don't feel like we've
been kind of Shanghai'd into
watching some demos without really
getting an idea of what's going on.
So that means an overview of the purpose.
And benefits of EOF.
That means an intro to
basic database operations.
Working with persistent
objects or enterprise objects.
A demo of desktop EOF applications.
And a conceptual model of
what's going on in EOF.
So let's start.
Well actually, let's one more note the
technology framework.
This is an introduction
primarily to two frameworks
called EO Access and EO Control.
These are the frameworks in the
Enterprise Objects Framework or
EOF that deals with database access.
The nice thing about that layer,
that database layer of EOF,
is that it allows us,
using the same database layer,
to build HTML and XML based
WebObjects applications,
Java client applications,
or Cocoa EOF applications.
[Transcript missing]
It's based on this natural mapping
between objects and relational databases.
It abstracts those database operations
and it preserves the object-oriented
nature of those things that you get.
When you get something into
EOF that used to be in the database,
you can treat it like an object.
It's sophisticated, it's mature,
and it's an object-oriented architecture.
Now, we talk about the
Enterprise Objects Framework.
What is an Enterprise Object anyway?
The idea here is it
implements an interface.
It's a java.lang.object that implements
a particular interface called the
EO Enterprise Object Interface,
which enables it to operate
with the framework and gives
it built-in persistence.
So this mapping is very sweet
between the database and objects.
We got entities,
so we can map a table in the database,
a type of thing to a class.
We can map an attribute,
so some instance variable
or property in the object,
we can map that very nicely
to a column in the table.
But it extends even further
Although I can't because
of the direction.
To relationships.
We know in an object model it's
a very common thing to just
have an item that refers to some
other object using composition.
And it's just a reference in memory,
a unique pointer.
In a database,
the same thing is handled via a join,
just these matching primary key
to foreign key combinations.
Well, again,
the Enterprise Objects Framework
is able to make that matching.
Now,
how many folks have been in at least one
WebObjects-related session this week?
You can tell me en masse
on the count of three,
most likely,
What tool we use to do a mapping
between a database and an object model.
So on the count of three we're going
to give it a try and then if you
don't get it I'll give you a hint.
So on the count of three
let's give it a try.
One, two, three.
Okay, we got the right answer.
I don't know if it was from the folks who
just come to any EOF session that exists,
but we're going to try to get it
louder because it's after lunch,
it's mid-afternoon,
it's kind of like almost mid-week,
and I think, you know,
we just need to shout
out at me on the stage.
So let's try this again.
One, two, three.
And for those of you who didn't get that,
it is EOModeler,
which defines this mapping between rows
in the database and objects in the model.
The point of EOF in a very
abstract sense is to get rows,
turn them into EOs,
and then get them back again.
And finally, what we'll be doing for
the rest of the day,
or the rest of this session,
is talking a bit about this
process and how it works.
I won't be labeled the model file.
Now, besides this mapping,
what are some of the other
advantages or benefits of using EOF?
One of the largest is this idea of
having multiple views into the same data.
So this idea that we can have a
HTML application that's running
publicly that people are hitting,
but on the back end we don't
want to administer the database
using an HTML front end possibly.
We might want to build a
Cocoa application or a Java client
application that's a more
desktop interactive experience for
interacting with that database.
Or it's possible we might want to build
an HTML front end that people can visit,
but then also provide the
same data as a web service via
XML to a number of individuals.
And we can use EOF, the same model file.
. We can use the same business logic
and build the view on top of that.
The nice thing about each of these is
that they're all EOF-based applications.
Now the logic's written in standard Java.
It's not written in a particular
vendor's database language,
which may be procedural,
which may lock you in because
you don't want to move that logic
from one database to another.
So it's in standard language.
It distributes the processing
as well by putting our business
logic in these enterprise objects.
We're not tying up the database doing
a lot of business logic calculations.
It's doing what databases
were initially designed for,
which is saving and retrieving
large amounts of information very,
very quickly.
Now, when I started using EOF,
I didn't know anything
about SQL whatsoever.
The nice thing about EOF,
if you are a programmer who's saying,
well, I've got to do some database stuff,
is that it dynamically
generates the SQL for you.
You define the model file,
you programmatically ask it
for things that you want in a
very object-oriented nature,
and all of that SQL gets
dynamically generated for you.
To me, that's a big win.
On the flip side,
for the person who loves writing SQL,
EOF also allows you full access
to those database features.
You can send any kind of raw SQL to
the database using the frameworks.
You can also execute any stored
procedures you might have in there.
EOF also allows you to connect
to multiple data sources.
We'll talk a little bit
about this a little later on.
And one last thing that you
get with EOF is a separate
scratch pad for every user,
a little thing called an editing context.
The idea here is that when that
row becomes an Enterprise Object,
Every user has their own editing context,
so they have their own little scratch
version of that row in the database.
They can make changes to it, add things,
delete things,
and it's not bothering anybody else
until that user saves the changes.
So each of those editing contexts
is like a little miniature alternate
universe where the row comes in and
is able to be played with a little bit
before those changes hit the database.
Now you'll notice that my
drawing is a little lopsided.
That's to indicate the fact
that typically when you have
a desktop EOF application,
you're often using one
editing context per user.
And so that application may
have one editing context.
When you're using a networked
tag-based XML or HTML application,
every session has a
default editing context.
So every user logging in will typically
have their own little editing space.
All right, let's mosey on.
Let's talk about the
basic EOF operations.
Fetching, inserting, updating, deleting,
saving and reverting.
Essentially each of these can be done,
especially when you're
just starting out in EOF,
with a line of code.
And we're going to walk
through those lines of code.
First we're going to talk a
little more about this guy,
the editing context.
The editing context is the key class when
you start using EOF programmatically.
It's the go-to guy.
If you want some objects
out of the database,
you ask the editing context.
If you want to add some things,
delete things,
you talk to the editing context.
You want to save the changes,
you want to throw away the changes.
You want to undo the changes,
you talk to the editing context.
So, who do you talk to?
Oh, that's pathetic.
All right.
Let's try it a little louder.
Who do you talk to?
Okay, that's still pathetic.
All right.
Good gracious.
So how do we get one of these things?
Well, the first thing that we do is
if we're writing a WebObjects
kind of tag-based application,
we just ask the session for its default
editing context and it gives us one.
Not a lot of work to be done there.
If we're doing a desktop app,
the editing context lives as an object in
your nib file so we can get access to it.
And any time programmatically you may
feel like creating an editing context,
you can just create a new one very
easily with a no-argument constructor.
Now,
a note with multi-threaded applications,
when doing any kind of
concurrent programming,
there are always shared resources
that need to be locked and unlocked,
the editing context being one of those.
The default editing context
is automatically locked
and unlocked for you.
If you make your own or if you're
using a nib-based editing context,
you'll want to, and you're multi-threaded
in that nib-based app,
you'll want to lock the editing
context before you use it
and unlock it afterwards.
So how do we get stuff
out of the database?
As you go through,
read the WebObjects documentation,
go down to the lab,
read articles on Stepwise,
talk to your WebObjects-using friends,
there are many different
ways you can fetch.
We're going to talk about one here,
but as you kind of get into various ways,
the basics are pretty much the same here.
You create this thing called
a fetch specification,
which is an object-oriented definition
of what you want from the database.
Then you've got to get
hold of an editing context.
Then you tell the editing context, "Hey,
I want you to fetch this," and
you hand it the fetch spec.
Then you get back an array of objects.
We're going to do it
the most codeless way,
or one of the most codeless ways,
that still requires a line of code.
We're going to, in the model file,
create a graphical fetch specification.
We'll see this in the demo,
but the idea here is
I can define what I want,
what sorting I want it to come back as,
as well as any criteria in terms of what
specifically I want from the database.
Once I have that,
I can use a line of code that will,
in essence, pull that fetch specification
out of the model file.
It will also take an
NSDictionary of bindings,
or key value pairs,
and kind of merge it with that fetch
specification so we can fill in
some variables in there to capture
anything the user has typed in.
You know, search for a house with two
bedrooms and three bathrooms.
Take that FET specification
and ask the editing context,
"Hey,
give me back those results." All of this
is done in one lengthily named method,
Objects with FET specification
and bindings.
It's a utility method of a very
handy class called EOUtilities,
which provides a lot of convenience
one-liners for common EOF operations.
In this case,
we get a hold of our default editing
context and then we ask EO Utilities
to give us back that objects with
fetch specification and bindings.
We need to tell it the editing context,
what kind of thing or what entity
of thing we're looking for,
the name of the fetch spec,
and that dictionary of bindings.
Now to create and insert a new object,
it's a very simple method,
one liner EO utility.
Create and insert instance.
In this case,
this will do two things for you.
It will make, in this case,
a new employee enterprise object and
it will tell the editing context,
insert this into the database.
Deleting is even easier.
You just tell the editing context,
get rid of this sucker.
Editing,
we don't even write any explicit code.
The editing context is smart
enough that it knows everything
that's been fetched into it,
and it knows everything
you've inserted into it.
And so as you make changes
to those Enterprise Objects,
it's automatically watching
or observing those changes,
so it knows what objects
have been edited.
And so to make changes,
all you do is treat that
Enterprise Object as an object.
You use accessor methods,
or you may use key value coding,
as has been mentioned a number of times.
Once you've inserted and deleted
and made a bunch of changes,
you basically have two choices.
You can either tell that editing context,
hey, I want those changes to actually
be reflected in the database.
Let's save changes.
Or you can tell the editing context,
you know, this was a bad idea.
I'm going to chuck those changes.
So the line to do that,
editing context save changes.
Editing context revert.
We'll get rid of all pending changes
and we'll leave the database untouched.
Now to take us through a couple of these
points in a WebObjects application,
I'd like to introduce Genevieve,
who is going to walk us through that.
My mouth is dry because I'm nervous.
So let's take a look at some
of the things that James has
been telling us about.
And to do that we're going to use a
little WebObjects HTML application
that looks at a listing,
looks at a database of real estate
listings and let us choose the ones
that we want to display based on some
input that we give it in the browser.
We can enter the number of bedrooms.
And we can further restrict the search by
entering a minimum number of bathrooms,
perhaps.
It's a very simple application
that talks to the database.
What does it take to actually
code something like this?
We can take a look at
it in Project Builder.
Since, as James told us,
the EO model is the central piece that
kind of holds everything together,
it ties together the application
on one side and the relational
database on the other side,
so let's start by taking
a look at the EO model.
That's one of our project
builder resources.
This is a stripped down version of the
real estate model that you'll see in a
lot of the WebObjects demos this week.
I made it a little smaller so it's
not quite so overwhelming to look at.
And as you've probably heard
by now if you've been at
any of the earlier sessions,
this is the mapping between
the relational database and
the objects in the application.
These are our entities
in the application.
Here's the corresponding database tables.
And here we can see the class in the
application that these correspond to.
All of our entities are going to
be classes that are subclasses of,
or implementations of,
EO Enterprise Object Interface.
Have you ever noticed
how redundant that is?
EO Enterprise Object.
EO is Enterprise Object.
The Enterprise Object,
Enterprise Object Interface.
Anyway, we have a default implementation
of that called EO Generic Record,
which is sufficient for a lot of things
that you want to pull from the database.
If your class happens to
need some business logic,
you would make a custom subclass of that.
We can take a look at our listing entity,
get kind of a closer look.
This is one of the main
entities in this model,
as you might expect.
Here are all the
attributes of the entity.
And attributes correspond to
the column in the database.
Here we can see the Java type and the
database type of all these attributes.
And in the lower part of the window here,
we can see any relationships
that this entity might have.
In this case,
it has two one relationships to the
address entity and agent entity.
And we'll hear more about relationships
later in the presentation.
Let's see.
So that's our EO model.
And let's see if we
have... any code anywhere.
Well, we have one WoE component in here.
So let's take a look at that.
We'll look at it in WebObjects Builder,
which you saw in the tools demo,
which is the tool that we use to
graphically build up an HTML interface,
which is actually a lot more
fun than writing HTML by hand.
And you can see here we have
a couple of text input fields.
That was our bedrooms
and bathrooms field.
We have a submit button that pushes
values from the application or from the
interface into the application logic.
And we have a lot of text input fields.
That was our bedrooms
and bathrooms field.
We have a submit button that pushes
values from the application or from the
interface into the application logic.
And we have a submit button that pushes
values from the application or from the
interface into the application logic.
And we have a submit button that pushes
values from the application or from the
interface into the application logic.
Here's a table that's going to
display all of our search results.
And if we look at this table,
we can see we have some dynamically
calculated strings in here.
We call these things WoE strings.
And they're bound to
something called listing.
That sounds a little familiar.
Let's take a look at what that is.
And that's our old pal,
the listing entity that we were
just looking at in EOModeler.
You can see all of its attributes here.
And you can see here this particular
string is bound to the listing number
attribute of the listing entity.
This is bound to bedrooms.
This is bound to bathrooms.
So you can start to see how
all this stuff ties together.
But what about our text input fields?
They're bound to something
called fetch spec bindings.
Well, what's a fetch spec?
Well,
if you were here last year and you saw
James' intro to EOF demo or presentation,
then you know that a fetch spec
lets you stipulate the objects
you want to fetch and manipulate.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, where am I?
I'm lost.
I think you're fetch-specking.
Thank you.
I got all excited here.
So we've seen the interface,
and we've seen the EL model.
Surely there has to be some
code in here somewhere.
Well, what's this choose listings thing?
That sounds like something
that we might want to do.
This is an action,
which means that it's bound to a
method somewhere in our application,
somewhere in the component.
And we can check,
we can select view source down here,
and that will put us
back in the source code.
Make this a little nicer to look at.
And there, we can see that we've got a
That's all of our database code.
That's all the code that we had to
write in order to get an application
that knows how to find the database,
connect to it,
and fetch things from it based
on some specifications that
we've given it in the UI.
James wasn't kidding about those two
lines of code that we needed to do this.
You can see here that in objects with
fetch specifications and bindings,
we're taking the default editing context,
which we've pulled from the session,
and into it we're going to fetch the
listing entity using the search listings
fetch specification and pushing values
from our fetch spec bindings that we
saw in the HTML interface into that.
One of the nice things about EOF is
that we give you API that allows you
to discover EO models at runtime.
You can discover the entities that they
contain and those entities' attributes,
relationships,
and other things that they don't have.
You can also use that
to store procedures,
primary keys, fetch specifications,
and pass those objects into
methods like objects with fetch
specification and bindings.
That gives us a great deal of
flexibility and gives you a great deal
of power with really a minimum of code.
So I think that shows us the
basic code that we wanted to have.
And back to you, James.
Well, you know Genevieve, I was thinking,
wouldn't it be nice if people could
also search for a range of prices
when they're looking up a property?
Could you just whip that up for me?
James?
Are you giving me a last
minute application spec change?
Not only am I giving you a last
minute application spec change,
but I'm doing so in an obviously
stage inscripted manner.
James!
We're in front of a large,
sophisticated audience!
Just do it like we practiced!
Okay.
Well, I guess that means that we
better add some fields to the UI.
So, what did you want?
A range of prices?
Yeah.
Oops.
Cannot type.
Okay, we'll put a text field in here and
we'll put another text field in here.
And let's see, what do we do?
We'll bind these text fields
to our fetchback bindings.
and I'm going to bind the value
to FetchPickBinding's min price.
And we'll give that a nice number format
so it doesn't look hideous on screen.
We'll select our second text
field and bind it to a max price.
As she's doing that,
what she's binding it up
to is a mutable dictionary,
which is just a hash table.
It's just a mutable place where
we can put key value pairs.
And because of key value coding,
and because a dictionary's whole job
in life is to store keys and values,
she's able to hook those text fields
up so that they are pushing keys
directly into that dictionary without
ever having to change her code.
That little dictionary is serving
as an infinitely expandable
place where you can stick as
many keys and values as you want.
And we're taking advantage
of that right here.
And so now we need to hook up,
we need to add another
column to our results table,
our display table,
and we're going to hook that
up to the asking price in our
and I'm going to go ahead
and start the session.
Okay, that takes care of the interface.
We're going to have to change
our fetch specification.
I forgot to show you this earlier.
Our listing entity has a fetch
specification associated with
it called Search Listings.
And you can build up fetch
specifications in the code,
but you can also build them
up graphically in EO Modeler.
So we'll click on this and it shows
us the graphical fetch spec builder.
You saw a slide of this earlier.
And right now we're currently qualifying
our select statement on the number of
bedrooms and the number of bathrooms.
But we need to add to it.
So we're gonna add asking price,
Greater than or equal to
that variable min price.
In our fetch spec bindings and
we need a max price less than
or equal to our max price.
Save that.
And we will recompile to pick
up the changes to the EO model.
Notice that we didn't have to
write any additional EOF code.
We didn't have to change any EOF code.
We didn't have to write any more SQL.
And here we have our application.
We've got our additional input fields.
We've got our additional display field.
and I will be your host for this session.
[Transcript missing]
You don't need to sit and figure out,
well, the primary key of this maps
to the foreign key of that,
because that's something
that you determine or you
set up in the model file,
and EOF does it all for you.
The other thing we don't need to do
with a relationship is if I have an
employee that I've fetched in and I want
to get to what department they're in,
I don't have to write more fetching code.
I just ask the employee, hey,
give me your department,
and that department object,
if it isn't in the application yet,
EOF is going to hit the database,
grab the correct row, and instantiate a
department object for me.
The fact that it might
not be there when I ask,
but it's definitely going to be
there immediately thereafter,
that is called faulting
in an object in EOF.
This means that let's
say I have a project,
has one employee working on it,
keep things simple,
who has an email address and
that email address is bob@b.com,
which I don't even think
is a legal domain name.
But boy does it fit on the slide.
So we have this example.
And if you're writing a bunch of SQL,
right, you may need to go and write some
SQL statements and get the right
things and make sure that the foreign
keys and the other keys match up.
Or I might use a key path in WebObjects.
I prefer using a key path in
WebObjects because even though you
can mistype a key path in WebObjects,
there's a heck of a lot less to
troubleshoot than all that SQL.
The thing to take away here
is use those EOs like objects.
Think of them as objects,
not as rows in a database.
All right, we've seen a WebObjects
application vending HTML.
We could similarly do one in a very
similar manner that spits out XML.
Now we're going to talk
about desktop applications.
One thing that's nice about the
web as a developer is that it's
very regimented what happens,
right?
A request comes in, you do something,
and you send out a response.
And WebObjects is very nicely
designed that it automatically,
when that request comes in,
it'll pull the values
out of that request,
it'll pull values out of
objects and shove them into
HTML or XML and spit it out.
So this request-response
cycle is very nicely tuned.
However, on the desktop,
life's more complicated.
If you've written... How many folks have
written a Cocoa application in here?
A couple folks.
How many folks have written
a swing application in here?
A few more folks.
I know I've found in the applications
that I've written that I spend a
whole heck of a lot of code saying,
"All right, I got this thing,
this object that represents
something in the user interface,
and I have this text field,
and I have to make sure that what the
value for the guy's first name is has
to match what's in the text field,
and if they change it here,
I have to update it here,
and then heaven forbid you actually
have another text field somewhere
in a table that also has the first
name because now you have to keep
everything in sync." And you write a lot
of code just doing that synchronization.
EOF has a framework called EO Interface.
And EO Interface uses an
object called a display group,
which displays a group of objects.
Go figure.
That manages all of that
synchronization and interaction with
a real desktop application for you.
And rather than talk more about it,
it's definitely something
that's much easier to see.
I'm going to turn things
back over to Genevieve.
So the first application that
we looked at was obviously
a simple HTML application.
It's the sort of thing that a prospective
home buyer might use to look at
real estate listings from a computer
in their home or in their office.
They really only need to
fetch the data and look at it,
and you really don't
want them to modify it.
But what about the real estate agent
who has to administer the database?
They're going to need to add listings,
delete listings,
make changes to listings.
And so this is where the richer
functionality that you get on a desktop
application can really be appreciated.
So what we have here is
a Cocoa EOF application,
listings by agent.
In the top table we see our agents,
and as we click on them,
we can see the listings in the
bottom table change so that
only the listings for that
particular agent are being shown.
And we can open a listing,
opens the listing for that agent,
pulls the information to give
us the photo of the agent
-- this is Todd Fernandez,
our QA manager -- and we can see
that the agent is actually manager.
And we can open multiple listings.
[Transcript missing]
So let's give this a listing
number that's going to be
a little bit easy to spot.
And we'll call this a condo and
we'll give it a Silicon Valley price.
And four bedrooms, one bathroom.
You're laughing, it's true.
[Transcript missing]
That, by the way, is wired up directly
to the editing context.
I didn't have to write any
code to be able to do that.
The editing context knows how to
manage all these changes for you.
And this place is
located here in San Jose.
The changes that I've been making
so far are all being made in memory.
What we have here is our
friend the editing context that
James told us about earlier,
managing all of these changes for us,
tracking the additions, the deletions,
the undo, the redo,
all the changes of mind,
and isolating those changes from
the database so that you're not
pushing changes back and forth
to the database unnecessarily.
Once we've figured out that we've got all
the changes that we want made correctly,
then we'll push those down to
the database by doing a save.
This operation here was also wired up
directly to the editing context for
this particular window so there was no
need to write any kind of code for that.
So did that really get
saved to the database?
We should check on that.
I may just be kidding you all.
So what we'll do is we will run our
little customer application again.
What did that have?
Three bedrooms and a price
somewhere between 400 and...
And here's that listing ID.
So you see it really did change.
It really did write to the database.
Let me just get rid of this real quickly.
It can't be that easy, right?
How does all the
synchronization take place?
Well, it's the EO Interface framework
that's doing this for you.
The way that you work with EO Interface
when you're doing development is through
the tool called Interface Builder.
You may have seen a little bit
of Interface Builder demoing
going on this week already.
I think there's a whole session on it.
Is it there?
Is there anybody know?
There is.
There's an IB session somewhere.
It's very interesting to watch.
So here's the main interface file for
this listings by agent application.
And one of the really cool things
about Interface Builder is that while
you're building up the interface,
you can actually see live
whether it works or not.
There's something called test mode.
And we'll invoke the test mode for this.
And we can see that
this is actually -- no.
This is actually pulling the data from
the database while we're working on it.
That can really help shrink down
the debug cycle for building
an interface quite a bit.
So we'll go back into
the editing mode for IBM.
So that James doesn't have a
chance to change the spec on me,
I'm going to add a text
field to it myself.
Let's add a field that shows the first
name of the agent so that we can be
real chummy with the agent on the phone.
So we pull a text field
down onto our window.
And we're going to wire this up
to the first name of the agent.
So we'll set the value
to the agent first name,
connect, and let's make sure that works.
You can see that we're pulling
the agent's first name.
We were able to do this all without
writing any additional database code,
without even getting out of
our interface building tool.
I wonder what would happen
if we change something,
actually change the data in here.
Would that work?
Let's give Andreas a nickname that he
can use when he's talking to maitre
d's or something in a restaurant.
Yep, looks like it works.
So the interface builder,
the interface is really live while you're
working on it and as I said it really
cuts the debug cycle down quite a bit.
And that's IP and EO interface.
Thank you.
So, I don't know about you,
but to me that saved me tons of time.
Even, I just finished deploying a
WebObjects application and I wrote
a little Cocoa EOF application
just so I could change things
in the database very easily.
And about 90% of the time I just
ran it in Interface Builder as
a development tool for accessing
things into the database.
So, even just for that reason,
it's a very, very handy technology.
So,
how much of it's really codeless might
be the question that comes to mind.
Is it all codeless?
Well,
certainly when we hit the save button,
we tell the editing context
through target action to save.
You would probably want to put some
error handling code around that
in case somebody tripped on the
database in the server closet and,
you know,
it's offline so the user doesn't
get some bizarre error message.
But all of that dynamic updating
of picking a new person and having
the new list of items show up,
that's all completely codeless.
The having text fields and other
text fields update automatically,
that is all completely codeless.
So, I find it a great time saver.
Excellent.
So we've seen a lot of kind of magic,
right?
One line of code here,
no lines of code here,
and all this magic kind of happens.
What I wanted to do to finish up is talk
a little bit about the framework itself.
What are the pieces of the framework so
that as you start learning about EOF,
start reading the documentation,
you'll run into a number of concepts,
a number of classes,
and you might wonder where
do these all fit together.
So I want to kind of talk us through
The EOF Stack.
Basically, how does a row become an EO,
who's involved, and what do they do?
So that when you start playing with EOF,
start reading about it, you know.
So,
So let me back up for a sec.
EO access and EO control,
those are used in every
single EOF application,
whether it's XML, HTML, Cocoa,
JAVA as an application.
EO interface is used only
in the desktop applications.
So EO access has two layers.
The adapter layer is where the
database connection occurs.
It has the database connection.
It's the thing talking to the database.
It doesn't know anything about
full-blown enterprise objects.
It's dealing in raw SQL generation
down to the database.
It's dealing in raw rows
coming back from the server.
Then it hands those raw rows
up to the database layer,
which does two very important things.
The first important thing that it does is
it turns that raw row into that living,
breathing enterprise object
that we can do nice stuff like
relationships and the like with.
It also takes a snapshot of
the values that came in and
keeps them for later use.
It does some caching.
So that later trips to the database
layer which may be avoided to
avoid load on your database
and also increase performance.
That's important to note because
by default when you fetch things,
it's going to take the
cached values first.
So that might be one of the
first times you run into a
snapshot as a new EOF developer.
I think there will be more on
that in the advanced EOF session.
So those are the two things.
Adapter layer, raw rows,
direct connection to database.
player, turn those rows into EOs,
and keep a snapshot.
All of this is configured
in the EO model file.
When you start using the
Enterprise Objects Framework,
Basically, you make this model file.
You do this mapping and it tells
these two parts of the EO access
framework how to deal with the
database and the incoming data.
Now, we can go in there and minutely
tweak just about every parameter you
can imagine at both of these layers.
However, that's probably not the best
thing to do in your first
time using EOF just because,
you know,
it's good to start with the basics.
Now, I mentioned earlier you can
hit multiple data sources.
You might have two different news feeds
coming in from two different databases.
You want to have news stories
that are being presented
from two different databases.
Well, we make an EO model.
That EO model,
when that application launches,
creates a database layer and an
adapter layer that's going to
deal with the particular database.
I want multiple data sources.
I add another model file.
When I launch this application,
a second set of that database layer and
adapter layer is going to show up that's
going to be hitting another data source.
In my code,
I don't necessarily know or care
which data source this is from.
I ask for a customer,
it gets it from one database.
I ask for a news story,
it comes from another database.
I don't care.
Now, as you're doing some reading,
you're going to come across
something called a model group.
Since we can have multiple model files,
we need some object that
holds them all together.
It's called the EO model group.
So when you come across it, don't freak.
It's really its job in life.
At this point,
we're able to access and turn
rows into EOs and back again,
multiple data sources that
pretty much evens out EO access.
So we'll move into control.
The EO Control Framework is
where our editing context lives.
It's where we programmatically control
and coordinate what's going on in EOF.
Now, we've got multiple databases
potentially happening,
although I think most EOF users
are hitting one database.
So you'll run into this guy called
the EO Object Store Coordinator.
The Object Store Coordinator's
only purpose in life,
or main purpose in life,
is when somebody asks
for the customer object,
it's going to figure out which stack
it should send that request to.
So it's literally coordinating
between the fact that we may
have multiple data sources.
Now, we got an old friend sitting
at the top of this stack,
the editing context.
As I mentioned before,
the editing context is your go-to guy,
but when you ask the editing
context for some objects,
it asks the object store
coordinator for objects,
it asks the database layer,
the appropriate database
layer for objects,
and so on all the way
down to the database.
This is designed so that you don't
[Transcript missing]
All right.
That is essentially EOF in a nutshell.
So the review.
First thing I'd like to
say for the review is EOF,
as we saw in the demo, I was able to,
Genevieve was able to
have two applications,
one a desktop app,
one a WebObjects HTML app,
both using the exact same model file,
potentially the exact same business
logic with the same validation code,
reused across multiple views of it.
To get started, there's not a whole lot
of code to get going.
As long as you remember you're
talking to that editing context,
it's pretty much the place to go
to programmatically deal with it.
And EO interface is very,
very groovy when it comes
to desktop applications.
So, how many folks were in the
intro to EOF session last year?
Just clap your hands.
Don't raise your hands.
Clap.
There we go.
There's a little song or something
that I did and folks seemed
to groove on it a little bit.
So I thought this year
I would do another song.
It's part of the review, however.
[Transcript missing]
This year, because things kind of
went well last year,
I thought I'd open up a little
bit and show folks a little
more of my sensitive side.
And so with that, I suppose I will begin.
Are you ready?
Here we go.
[Transcript missing]
and and and
and the EOF team will be joined by
the EOF team's team of engineers,
engineers and engineers.
[Transcript missing]
and James Dempsey, Genevieve Purugganan.
At the WebObjects Cocoa Boff tonight,
they've asked me to play.
So you're all just going
to have to come back.
No.
I will do another one because
I can't resist that applause.
Well a fetch specification
specifies those objects you want
to fetch as its name implies.
With a fetch spec baby you can
stipulate those objects you
want to fetch and manipulate.
[Transcript missing]
and those criteria of what you desire
you're gonna wrap that all up into a
qualifier and don't forget about those
sort orderings determines the order
of objects the fetch spec will bring
[Transcript missing]
You make a change,
the editing context knows.
One more verse.
The EO database,
it maintains a snapshot of the
initial values of each row you've got.
You can refresh refetched objects
if you want to replace cached values
with fresh data from the database.
EOs, EOs, EOs
This was a little song about EOF,
I hope you get the gist.
Still a framework that
helps your objects persist.
I'll be here all the week.
All right,
so actually stop by the Cocoa EOF BOF,
or the Cocoa WebObjects BOF.
I will be hanging out
there and playing a tune.
I might have a third new tune.
And come back to the feedback form.
They might let me sing the
relationship song again correctly.
Stop by the WebObjects lab.
Want to learn more about EOModeler?
Go to the Advanced Data Modeling session.
More about faulting and enhanced
performance and optimizing EOF,
the Advanced EOF session,
and optimizing WebObjects
applications in general,
the Optimization session on Friday.
Tony and Bob are the folks to contact.
Services@apple.com for... Take the
WebObjects training if you're just
getting started with WebObjects.
For more info, the documentation,
how to access the documentation.